Seeding process - FAQs

QUESTION 1
Rhizobium and PSB used for biological seed treatment of soybeans are marketed by various companies. So how do you identify a good bacterial culture?
Preference should be given to purchase bacterial culture from Agricultural Universities, KVK if possible.
Check the expiration date of the bacterial culture while purchasing.
If the rhizobium and PSB in the market are available in powder form, the bag can be held upside down in the hand to see if it is good or not. After holding the bag upside down, the bacteria inside the compost bag itself
 If it is stuck it should be considered good and if it falls completely then it should not be bought as it lacks moisture.
QUESTION 2
What is PSB?
PSB stands for Phosphorus Solubilizing Bacteria. Legumes require more phosphorus. Phosphorus is present in our soil, but not in a form available to crops. PB works to make the phosphorus in the soil available to the crop in the form it needs. They are very useful for all crops, in all soils.
Similarly, the chemical fertilizer applied for Phosphorus is only 15-20% effective. This means that only 15-20% of the chemical fertilizers we apply become available to the crops. And 80-85% is stabilized. PSBs work to provide stabilized phosphorus
QUESTION 3
If the seed treatment of bacterial fertilizers is to be done, will PSB, Rhizobium, Trichoderma be used in combination?
 Since these are all organic fertilizers, it would be appropriate to use them together. But no chemical drugs should be mixed in it.

QUESTION 4
Does KMB along with Rhizobium, PSB and Trichoderma also work if electricity is applied to soybean seeds?
Rhizobium bacteria fix nitrogen in the air.
PSB stands for phosphorus solubilizing bacteria, they make available phosphorus in the soil to crops.
KMB organisms provide soil nutrients to crops.
Trichoderma is a friendly fungus. It protects the seed and crop from fungal diseases.
These are all biological factors. You can do biological seed treatment together before sowing.
This saves on chemical fertilizers and increases income.
QUESTION 5
After chemical seed treatment, the seeds are wrinkled. What is the reason for that? And is it suitable for sowing?
During chemical seed treatment, if more water is used along with the chemical agent, the seed gets wrinkled. The spore of the soybean plant is on the seed itself. So during the seeding process
 Water should be used as much as required, and the seeding process should be done gently. There is no objection to using the said seed for sowing.

QUESTION 6
If chemical seed treatment, after germination, the chemical agents do not allow insects and worms to survive on the crop, but after chemical seed treatment, will biological seed treatment agents survive?
 Your question is very correct. During seed treatment we apply fungicides, insecticides and biological agents. The fifth order FIR is Fungicide, Insecticide and Rhizobium. Now as per the question we asked while doing the seeding process all these factors can affect each other to some extent. But most of the fungicides and insecticides used for seed treatment are interferon. So after seed treatment they are absorbed into the seed. That is why we wait for some time after one seeding process and let the seeds dry and then do the next seeding process. In addition, the fungicides, insecticides and biological agents used for seed treatment are compatible with each other and have been tested experimentally. And only after that our farmers have been asked to do the said seed process.
